csi: update multus design to mitigate csi-plugin pod restart (#9903)
rook/rook: design/ceph/multus-network.md

This will allow Ceph CSI pods to run using host networking and still access Ceph's public multus
network.

The design for mitigating the issue is to re-architect the CSI nodeplugin DaemonSet into two
DaemonSets:

* one that runs the `csi-plugin` container
* one that runs the `driver-registar`, `csi-addons`, and `liveness-prometheus` containers as well as a new
  `copy-binary` init-container

#### New CSI-plugin DaemonSet
The Rook-Ceph Operator's CSI controller creates a CSI-plugin DaemonSet configured to use the
`network.selectors.public` network specified for the CephCluster. This DaemonSet runs on all the
nodes.

This Pod should only be stopped and restarted when a node is stopped so that volume operations do
not become blocked. The Rook-Ceph Operator's CSI controller should set the DaemonSet's update
strategy to `OnDelete` so that the pods do not get deleted if the DaemonSet is updated while also
ensuring that the pods will be updated on the next node reboot (or node drain).

The new CSI-plugin DaemonSet only contains a single container called `csi-plugin`, the container
responsible for mounting filesystem and attaching block devices. Additionally, it has a small init

> container that removes the `/usr/local/bin/cephcsi` binary from the image. Since the main container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
container that removes the `/usr/local/bin/cephcsi` binary from the image. The main container
```

will put the desired binary back in place inside its local filesystem.
Also, the `command` to execute from the main container will change to use a new binary that will be responsible for:

* watching for changes in the Kubelet HostPath volume directory about the `cephcsi` binary,
  typically `/var/lib/kubelet/plugins/rook-ceph.<flavor>.csi.ceph.com/`, where `flavor` is either `rbd` or `cephfs`
* if a new binary is found, it will be copied to the local container's filesystem at
  `/usr/local/bin/cephcsi`. This helps preventing any issues like intentional deletion of the
  CSI-sidecars DaemonSet (it cleanups up the binary upon deletion) while the CSI-plugin DaemonSet is
  still running.

>   There is obviously a performance downside to copying the binary and potential failures too.

Reviewer: How big is the cephcsi binary? I'm imagining in the 30-50 MB range for a typical go binary. Hopefully perf won't be a real concern, especially if we could skip the copy if it's already the latest?

>   TODO: Should we also remove the binary from the Kubelet HostPath volume directory once it's copied to

Reviewer: Seems like we need to leave it on the host in case the volumeplugin is restarted. What if it's deleted from the host when the pod shuts down that copied it there? In any case, I'd rather risk leaving it on the host in corner cases than risk breaking the volumeplugin because it is too aggressively deleted.

* `csi-addons`

In the initialization sequence of the DaemonSet there is the new `copy-binary` init container that will copy the CSI plugin binary to the Kubelet HostPath volume directory.
Upon startup, it will:

* copy the `cephcsi` binary to the Kubelet HostPath volume directory (on the host), from
  `/usr/local/bin/cephcsi` to `/var/lib/kubelet/plugins/rook-ceph.<flavor>.csi.ceph.com/`
* if a binary already exists it will remove it and copy the new one
TODO: if we decide to remove the binary from the Kubelet HostPath volume directory, we don't need to
mention any removal in this bullet point
* along with binary the CLI arguments will be copied in a text file, the filename will be the name of the
  binary suffixed with `.args`

#### Interactions between components
When the CSI-sidecars DaemonSet is updated, the `cephcsi` binary will have a new version and
potentially new arguments as well. The new `cephcsi` binary is copied (from the `copy-binary`
init container) in the Kubelet HostPath volume directory.
If copying fails, the container will keep retrying until the operation succeeds.
On the side of the CSI-plugin DaemonSet, the directory will be watched for changes and will

> accordingly kill and start the new binary process. If the new binary process fails to start, the

Reviewer 2: It would be good to clarify: under what condition is the process killed? under what condition is it started? 

IIUC, it is killed and immediately started once a new binary appears, correct?

much as possible. At least, we might always leave a single binary only since each binary is
overwritten, same for the args file. In order to mitigate this we will rely on a PostHook to clean up the copied binary
along with the arguments file. However, cleanup is not guaranteed to be successful due to the
PostHook's nature.
TODO: remove this section if we decide to remove the binary from the Kubelet HostPath volume
directory directly from the CSI-plugin DaemonSet

There is no potential race to be worried about, if the CSI-plugin DaemonSet starts before the
CSI-sidecars DaemonSet, it will simply keep watching for the binary to be present in Kubelet
HostPath volume directory. Once it is detected, the `cephcsi` process will be started.

When a new node is added, both DaemonSets are started, and the
process described above occurs on the node.

Both DaemonSets should be deleted when the CSI driver components are removed and
the termination should remove the `cephcsi` binary and the arguments file.
TODO: remove last sentence if we decide to remove the binary from the Kubelet HostPath volume directory directly from the CSI-plugin DaemonSet

> The initial implementation of this design is **not** limited to supporting a single CephCluster with

Reviewer: So we can support multiple CephClusters with multus now? The double negative "not limited" is not clear to me. :)

This will allow Ceph CSI pods to run using host networking and still access Ceph's public multus
network.

> The design for mitigating the issue is to add a new DaemonSet that will hold all the CephFS mounts

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The design for mitigating the issue is to add a new DaemonSet that will own the network for all CephFS mounts
```

Reviewer 3: ... as no container can really hold mounts or let alone block devices.

as well as RBD mapped devices. The `csi-{cephfs,rbd}plugin` DaemonSet are left untouched.

#### New "holder" DaemonSet
The Rook-Ceph Operator's CSI controller creates a `csi-plugin-holder` DaemonSet configured to use the
`network.selectors.public` network specified for the CephCluster. This DaemonSet runs on all the
nodes along side the `csi-{cephfs,rbd}plugin` DaemonSet.

This Pod should only be stopped and restarted when a node is stopped so that volume operations do
not become blocked. The Rook-Ceph Operator's CSI controller should set the DaemonSet's update
strategy to `OnDelete` so that the pods do not get deleted if the DaemonSet is updated while also
ensuring that the pods will be updated on the next node reboot (or node drain).

The new holder DaemonSet only contains a single container called `holder`, the container

> responsible for holding filesystem mounts and mapped block devices. It is used as a passthrough by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
responsible for pinning the network for filesystem mounts and mapped block devices. It is used as a passthrough by
```

the Ceph-CSI plugin pod which when mounting or mapping will use the network namespace of that holder
pod.

> One task of the Holder main container is to passing the required PID into the `csi-plugin` pod. To
> solve this, the main container will create a symlink to an equivalent of `/proc/$$/ns/net` in the

Reviewer 3: "main container" makes it sound like there would be more than one container?  That goes against "The new holder DaemonSet only contains a single container" above.
```suggestion
One task of the Holder container is to pass the required PID into the `csi-plugin` pod. To
solve this, the container will create a symlink to an equivalent of `/proc/$$/ns/net` in the
```

`hostPath` volume shared with the `csi-plugin` pod. Then it will sleep forever.
In order to support multiple Ceph-CSI consuming multiple Ceph clusters, the name of the symlink should be based on the Ceph
cluster FSID. The complete name of the symlink can be decided during the implementation phase of the
design.
That symlink name will be stored in the Ceph-CSI configmap with a key name that we will define
during the implementation.

#### Interactions between components
When the Ceph-CSI plugin mounts or maps a block device it will use the network namespace of the
Holder pod. This is achieved by using `nsenter` to enter the network namespace of the Holder pod.
Some changes are expected as part of the mounting/mapping method in today's `csi-plugin` pod.
Instead of invoking `rbd map ...`, invoke `nsenter --net=<net
ns file of pause in long-running pod> rbd map ...` (and same for `mount -t ceph ...`).  The `csi-plugin`

> pod

Reviewer 3: stray newline?

is already privileged, it already adds `CAP_SYS_ADMIN`. The only missing piece is to expose the host
PID namespace with `hostPID: true` on the `csi-cephfsplugin` DaemonSet (RBD already has it).

> Cleaning up the symlink is not a requirement nor a big issue. Once the Holder contains stops, its

Reviewer 2: ?

```suggestion
Cleaning up the symlink is not a requirement nor a big issue. Once the Holder container stops, its
```

network namespace goes away with it. So at worst, we end up with a broken symlink.

When a new node is added, both DaemonSets are started, and the
process described above occurs on the node.

The initial implementation of this design is limited to supporting a single CephCluster with
Multus.

> Until we stop using HostNetwork entirely it is impossible to support multiple CephClusters with and

Reviewer: Do we need to support multiple cephclusters? Not sure we need to worry about it, or at least it's much lower priority.

Author: Rook supports deploying multiple clusters so it's natural to consider it :)
